Cloud computing
Cloud computing is the delivery of computing resources, including servers, storage, 
databases, networking, and software, over the internet. It allows users to access these 
resources on-demand without needing to manage the 
underlying infrastructure. Essentially, it's about using the internet to access and utilize 
computing power and other services instead of relying on local hardware. 

AWS
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is the world's most comprehensive and broadly adopted cloud platform, 
offering over 230 fully featured services from data centers globally. Millions of customers-including the fastest-growing startups, 
largest enterprises, and leading government agencies are using AWS to lower costs, become more agile, and innovate faster.


AWS well architecture framework 

1 operational excellence
2 security 
3 performance efficiency 
4 cost optimization 
5 reliability 
6   Sustainability
1. Operational Excellence

2. Security
3. Reliability 
4. Performance Efficiency
5. Cost Optimization
6. Sustainability

AWS Regions and Available Zones

An Availability Zone consists of one or more data centers, each with redundant power, 
networking, and connectivity. The data centers of a single Availability Zone, or "AZ" for short, 
are typically within 100 kilometers or 60 miles of each other. Think of it as a cluster of interconnected
 data centers in a specific geographic zone, that can help your applications become 
 highly available - hence the name, Availability Zone.

AWS Regions and Available Zones

 To improve the durability of your data, you can also replicate it in two or more regions. 
 This is helpful for disaster recovery and backups.

The Availability Zones of a single AWS Region are typically within hundreds of kilometers or 
miles of each other. However, these AZs are still within a specific country to comply with
the data sovereignty requirement. This is particularly useful if you have sensitive data that 
must only be stored in a certain location or country for data privacy compliance.

AWS Edge Locations

The other component of the AWS Global Cloud Infrastructure is the edge networks of
Point-of-Presence or PoP. It consists of Edge Locations and Regional Edge Caches, 
which enables you to distribute your content with low-latency (pronounce: ers. Basically, Laaay-tancy)
to your global users. Bas a PoP serves as an access point that allows two different networks to 
communicate
 with each other.

AWS Elastic Computing Cloud(EC2)

Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) provides on-demand, 
scalable computing capacity in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Cloud.
Using Amazon EC2 reduces hardware costs so you can develop and deploy applications faster. 
You can use Amazon EC2 to launch as many or as few virtual servers as you need, configure security and networking,
 and manage storage.

Services:

IAM- Identity and access Management
EC2- Elastic Computing Cloud
server virtual server ec2 instance cpu and memory
VPC - Networking 
EBS -Elastic Block Storageerd disk
VPC - Virtual Private Cloud Networking

S3 - Simple storage service
EFS Elastic File system

RDS- Relational Database Service (SQL) 6 to7 (MySQL,Sql,..... Postgre,
 ms sqlserver, maria db,ibm db2, aurora -mysal and post gre)
Elastic Cache Nosql -2 ( redis, memcache)
Dynamodb -Serverless database

Cloudwatch -Monitoring
Cloudtrail -Administrative events can be tracked or auditing
Route53- AWS DNS - www.rameshmuddappagari.com

EKS- elastic kuberntes service ( Kubernetes)
ECS-elastic container service (Docker)
ECR- elastic container registry (Docker registry)

AWS DevOps services
Code build
Code pipeline 
Code deploy
Code config
Code star

Cloud front -CDN (content delivery network)
SNS -Simple Notification service 
SES - Simple Email service 
SQS -Simple Queing service 

Lambda - Server less
AWS directory Service -L

We want to admistrate AWS Service:

GUI -AWS Management Console , Azure Portal 
CLI -AWSCLI or Cloud shell ,Azure shell or azure power shell
API/SDK- Developers can use , azure api /SDK
IAC- Infrastrute as code 
AWS - Cloud Formation , azure ARM templates / biceps
Terraform ,Azure is aslo used terraform

25+  Regions ,AZ min 2-3 some regions or 5-6, 700+ edge location